early June 1967 the six-day war in the
Middle East between Israel Egypt Jordan
and Syria is underway a spy ship very
lightly armed but bristling with
antennae steams into the Mediterranean
to eavesdrop on the conflict it is
patrolling in international waters off
the egyptian coast at 2:00 in the
afternoon on June the 8th with the war
reaching its climax Israeli Jets and
motor torpedo boats launch an unprovoked
attack on the ship they dropped napalm
and strafe its decks with rockets cannon
fire and armor-piercing rounds before
trying to sink it with torpedoes
[Music]
and we had no way to defend ourselves
and it was just we're just slaughtered
and they shot up the life rafts that
were put into the water and they shot
the ones that were still on board ship
bullet holes shell holes everywhere
blood the fo'c'sle the front part of
this ship was just red with blood
throughout the attack the ship flies the
Stars and Stripes the flag of Israel's
closest ally the United States of
America it's named the USS Liberty is
freshly painted on its Stern and the bow
carries the distinctive numbers of an
American naval vessel out of a crew of
just under 300 there were 34 killed and
172 injured and varying degrees to
life-threatening life debilitating
injuries so that was more than
two-thirds of the crew
[Music]
this audiotape which has never been
broadcast before was recorded in real
time by the Israeli military during the
assault the woman's voice in the
background is counting down the seconds
it proves that Israeli commanders knew
all along that they were attacking an
American ship for the first time this
and other evidence allows us to reveal
the true story of what happened that day
and what came after when a deadly
assault by one ally on another was
covered up and an American president was
manipulated by the secret agents of a
foreign power events that have shaped
us-israeli relations ever since
[Music]
the United States Navy Memorial in
Washington DC June the 8th 2014 every
year on the anniversary of the attack on
the USS Liberty survivors relatives and
supporters gathered together
it's a remembrance of those who who were
killed that day the 34 on Dave Lucas I
was in charge of the deck force I was 25
my first child was born when I was 1 day
out on that cruise it's as long as
they're survivors and and maybe children
of survivors I think this will probably
be an annual event and the names of the
34 killed are read out punctuated by the
tolling of a navy bell
and the playing of taps the traditional
military funeral lament
[Music]
it's important to not forget what
happened and to continue to try to find
out why it happened and and who made it
happen in the summer of 1967 America was
in turmoil an incendiary mixture of
racial discrimination and extreme
poverty exploded into a summer of
rioting in cities across the country but
one issue dominated the Vietnam War in
all 10,000 troops would die that year
the Americans were trapped they couldn't
leave and they couldn't with
[Music]
in the middle-east to war looked
inevitable there was growing tension
between Israel and its Arab neighbors
armies were mobilizing Israel promised
the White House they would not attack
first but on the 5th of June they jammed
radar sets at the US Embassy in Tel Aviv
so the Americans couldn't detect their
jets taking off to launch a surprise
assault on Egypt meanwhile the USS
Liberty was sailing across the
Mediterranean into the war zone Liberty
was a state-of-the-art
intelligence gathering vessel of the
time and what we did is we listed we
were a listening ship my name is Lloyd
painter I was a research officer we
could scent we could receive any signal
that was out there Loeb and I ban
anything intercepting it recording it
and we did have on board some
translators who could have an immediate
translation of what was going on we
would actually bounce signals off the
moon back to NSA we were we're spies I'm
Jim Cavanaugh I was a communication
technician aboard the USS Liberty and I
intercepted Morse code we're spies when
we were intercepting messages from
embassies military bases police anything
and everything that we could get to
ensure that the United States was
comfortable what was going on in the
world and no one's conspiring against us
and basically to protect our interests
[Music]
this was the Cold War American President
Lyndon Johnson knew that the Russians
already had substantial military
influence in Egypt he needed to find out
what they were going to do next to make
sure that a local conflict did not
become a world war with the USA back in
Israel and Russia siding with the Arab
cause I was assigned as a Russian
linguist aboard the ship I'm Bryce
Lockwood United States Marine Corps
retired the Israelis our primary purpose
was to intercept communications of the
Russian spy aircraft as it were at
Alexandria Egypt and then that was our
job was to find them
we were not targeted against Israelis
life was very relaxing and one of the
nice things about the Liberty is we had
air conditioning because we had
communications equipment so we were cool
in the hot days it was a very laid-back
very clean ship it was it was spotless
the morale was pretty high coming very
high by the time the Liberty arrived off
the coast of Egypt on the 8th of June
the war had just two days left to run
Israel had seized the old city of
Jerusalem the West Bank and the Gaza
Strip Jordanian forces were beaten and
Egypt was conceding defeat only Syria
held out
the airwaves were dead the only voices
we did get were those of Israeli or
Hebrew with what we were hearing my name
is Bob Wilson I worked for NSA on June
the 8th 1967 when and what we were
trying to monitor find something coming
from the direction of Egypt there just
was nothing they owned the skies and the
ground and everything David I don't
think there was anything moving at that
time that they didn't know about I was
listening to the chatter night before he
knew it was an American ship that came
into the area they knew who we were 5:15
a.m. first light the ship's log recorded
an Israeli photo reconnaissance plane
flying over the Liberty that was easily
identifiable as an or Atlas aircraft and
those are photo reconnaissance aircraft
Israeli records obtained by al-jazeera
show their reconnaissance plane reported
the Liberty as an American spy ship hull
number gt-r five well I was on the
bridge John Scott I was the damage
control officer circled the ship kind of
a broad circle and headed back towards
Israel Israeli planes then continued to
fly over the Liberty all morning and
they would do half moon passes over us
and we saw that they were Israeli they
were slowly lumbering over our ship and
we were waving at them they were waving
at action they were sophisticated almost
as sophisticated as we were as far as
surveillance and technology they had
everything we supplied it with all the
technology to this day and I felt that
we were in we were in great shape
because they knew who we were
they're our friends we felt safe
actually was a secure feeling to see
them there was one other thing which
made the crew feel safe we had an
American flag flying the standard and
then we put up the holiday colors which
is a huge American flag and it was a
bright sunny day with the wind blowing I
don't know five or ten knots the flag
was unfurled you could see it for miles
meanwhile Israeli military jets were on
their way on the real-time audio tape
obtained by al-jazeera
at 1:53 p.m. the
I asked their base control about the
ship the USS Liberty was the only ship
of any size in the area the American 6th
fleet including two aircraft carriers
was 500 miles away oh it was a great day
hello I'm Jim Smith I was a damage
Controlman in engineering I mean I'm 20
years old it's the time I come from a
small town used to throw hay bales and
in the summertime for a buck an hour Sun
was shining blue sky clouds nice people
sunbathing on the deck we had lunch and
five minutes later maybe here came the
Jets and when nobody really knew what
was happening until they started firing
[Music]
the captain said to me alert the forward
gun mouth were under attack
and I tried to raise the two sailors in
the forward gun mounts I looked out and
they were they were blown to pieces by
the rocket when the attack started and
we realized that we needed help we tried
to communicate with the sixth fleet they
were jamming both our distress
frequencies and our tactical frequencies
the tactical frequencies is alright but
the International distress frequencies
is a violation of international law to
jam them and the Israelis were jamming
them and we could not get a signal
across here's a question I have to ask
who would know the frequencies other
than an ally and who is the ally in the
war I was in Egypt it was Israel they
would know and only they would know in
this conflict what our frequencies would
be now cut off from the outside world
the crew on the Liberty was defenseless
we had four fifty caliber machine guns
on board that were basically there to
repel any borders that might come by you
know a pirate situation certainly
weren't designed to bring down jet
aircraft that we're hammering at us but
you can't shoot a jet going 600 miles an
hour with a 50 caliber machine gun it
doesn't work it was just a surreal scene
people who had been standing there
earlier joking and laughing we're now
dead dying and with the walking dead and
wounded it was just unreal gasoline
barrels stored on the deck of the ship
burst into flames the crew rushed to try
to put out the fires I was watching the
aircraft as they circled around and when
they got to coming back towards the ship
I just holler at him down then fire the
circle back round we jump back up and
keep fighting fire the rocket noises are
in this when a rocket explodes
I can't escape a rocket Oh care where
you go what the crew didn't know was
that at three minutes past two the
Israeli pilots were ordered to use a new
much deadlier weapon the biggest problem
I guess from from that was the napalm
which they dropped from the airplane the
napalm had burned scorched almost the
entire front part of the ship the bridge
area the whole top side of the ship had
been set on fire and was all charred it
was no longer a navy gray you have to
stop the fires to stop the flooding to
keep that ship afloat that's your home
you got nowhere else to go you can't
back up and go down the road because
there is no down the road up above the
Israeli military argued about what
should happen next and who should sink
the Liberty remember thinking I was in
pretty good shape then I said I think I
can swim it to the shore and then I
thought sharks and I thought a lot of
things all quickly you know
[Music]
at 11 minutes past 2:00 with the Israeli
Jets running out of ammunition
the pilots were instructed to fly down
and confirm the identity of the ship it
was now 12 minutes past 2:00 and the
Israeli control tower knew for certain
this was an American ship the same one
is forces had first identified at 5:15
a.m. that morning and then buzzed again
during seven additional reconnaissance
flights throughout the day
the Jets then pulled out but three
israeli navy motor torpedo boats were
already on their way the USS Liberty was
a spice ship in the event of an attack
it was standard procedure for the spies
on board to destroy everything just in
case it fell into enemy hands
everyone was destroying material
everyone was stripping information off
of computers ripping computers open
pulling information out that's something
you just don't want to hear aboard ship
you've done all this work collected this
intelligence and processed it and now
you have to destroy it you just didn't
want the enemy to get a hold of anything
classified at 235 the Israeli motor
boats fired five torpedoes four missed
but one hit
[Music]
[Applause]
it had been over nine hours since the
Israeli military first identified the
liberty Israeli planes had flown over it
repeatedly and 20 minutes earlier their
control tower had confirmed it yet again
as an American ship 25 Americans were
about to die in a single moment this is
what it looks like when a torpedo hits a
ship the size of the Liberty the torpedo
threw us up in the air like a
rollercoaster it felt like one coming
down dead silence lights all off smoke
and haze everywhere I went back to the
drinking fountain and filled it with
blood reached down to get a drink and a
black man stared back at me
and when it fell back to get right it
just kept getting wrong kept sinking and
sinking and sinking
we just waited all of us waited thinking
that this was it we're going down and I
figured that was the end of life for me
the torpedo had blown a huge hole in the
hull 39 feet by 24 killing 25 Americans
in a single hit the torpedo hit the room
that I was in and it was just luck this
guy died this one lived that guy it was
how much shrapnel was coming in your
direction
you know the old-fashioned typewriters I
had the letter H sticking out of my left
foot I had I don't know 80 pieces of
shrapnel in my lower extremities and the
place filled up with water that fast
totally black totally filled with powder
and oil it was like
[Music]
you were gagging and you only had about
eight or ten inches of space where you
could catch a breath only way I could go
in that direction it was to drop down
and swim underwater four or five strokes
come back up and then frantically catch
a breath and try to find something else
on hold on to I got pulled through the
hatch and onto the deck others were not
so lucky my friend Ronnie Campbell had a
desk right there and I remember Ronnie
saying you fellas can do what you want
to say I'm gonna write a letter home and
he stuck a piece of paper in his mill
his typewriter and began typing dear
Eileen you won't believe what's
happening to us and just seconds after
that the torpedoes struck and killed
both the two Marines killed my friend
Ronnie Campbell and my job was to try to
get probably 20 or 30 wounded sailors
out to the main deck and to the life
rafts so I went up and looked out myself
before I tried to get anyone up and
that's when I observed a motor torpedo
boat Israeli plainly marked with a star
of david' machine-gunning our life raft
the crew of the Liberty were now trapped
on board their own ship with nowhere to
run and nowhere to hide the torpedo
boats came in closer and began to
machine-gun the ship using
armor-piercing projectiles the
armor-piercing the shells that they were
using we're leaving holes about that big
around and the metal plating just peel
it out like it was orange peel at close
range the armor-piercing rounds ripped
through the steel hull of the ship
nowhere was safe this bullet was
retrieved from one of the navigational
books at the rear portion of the bridge
it had penetrated the skin of the ship
going through at least one other book
and then stopped in in the second book
this is part of an armor-piercing shell
the outer portion or jacket makes the
hole that this then goes through and I'm
bullet like this that hit seaman Francis
Brown and and killed him he died right
on the spot just fell to the floor dead
he was just barely 18
[Music]
there weren't enough helmets to go
around for everyone it was like sitting
in a cardboard box and having somebody
shoot through it the bullets were just
coming everywhere throughout the attack
the liberty had been silent to the
outside world all its aerials were
either smashed or jammed
we had one whip antenna which hadn't
worked the entire cruise and it had a
bullet hole in it one of the radio man
had taken a reel of coax cable and ran
it from one of the transmitters back
there to that with antenna and took some
shrapnel in the process he got out and
made a Firefox Firefox this is rock star
rock star under attack by unidentified
surface and neighbor units require
immediate assistance the American Sixth
Fleet was 500 miles away
and picked up the signal so did the
Israeli Armed Forces the attack stopped
shortly afterwards the American aircraft
carriers were in the middle of a nuclear
weapons drill and had to rearm with
conventional bombs before they could
take off once the Israelis knew the u.s.
jets were in the air they summoned the
American naval attache and told him
there had been a terrible mistake
the American planes were recalled as
they returned Israeli helicopters flew
out to the Liberty this one had some
personnel from the Israeli government
and the US naval attache has dropped a
brown paper sack on the deck in the fore
part of the ship weighted down with an
orange added business card in it it
landed right next to a severed leg of
one of the deck personnel and the note
said do you have counselors
pretty obvious that there were
casualties I mean there's still body
parts and blood streaming down the
bulkheads so his message do you have
casualties was kind of out of place one
of the sailors carried that sack back to
the captain the captain took out the
note and read it looked up at the
helicopter and popped the social thing
or Adam June the 8th 1967 the height of
the Six Day War the USS Liberty an
American spy ship had just been attacked
by Israeli Jets and torpedo boats while
in international waters off Egypt
badly damaged two-thirds of its crew
were dead or wounded as soon as the news
reached Washington the attack on the
Liberty instantly triggered a domestic
political crisis according to documents
released under the Freedom of
Information Act one solution suggested
in American government circles was to
sink the Liberty so journalists could
not photograph it and inflame public
opinion against the Israelis the NSA
rejected this idea with an impolite
comment handling the media became the
top priority I was taken to my home in
White Oak Maryland my name is Patricia
blue-ray Jacques and my husband was
killed on the Liberty and by the time I
got there there were any number of
people from the National Security Agency
there they were there to make sure that
I didn't speak to anyone from the press
and I didn't they stay night and day
back in the Mediterranean the Liberty
was now listing at ten degrees a massive
hole in the hull above and below the
to line the planes that they said they
were sending to us never arrived what I
was afraid of and I think most of us was
that we were gonna sink well the mess
decks was was pretty much littered with
the wounded it looks like something out
of a horror movie
but people standing around or lying
wounded and dead and stunned the heads
missing parts of their bodies the
Liberty had only one doctor on board
with very limited medical resources
there was not a table that wasn't being
used with a body honor a wounded body on
it the doctor fixed compound fractures
and treated bullet and shrapnel wounds
while blood transfusions were given arm
to arm it was it was real bad and the
doctor said to him do you want me to
operate he said you're probably going to
die if I do it and you'll certainly die
if I don't and and he said go ahead
doctor and so when the doctor operated
we held him as tight as we could as
horrible pain I'm sure for him and all
of a sudden he went he went limp and he
died right there I don't want to ever
see anything like that again
captain McGonagall received a pretty bad
leg injury lost a lot of blood
he was navigating by the stars we had a
little bit of power and tons of water in
our belly which meant the ship waved
back and forth all night long the next
day American ships arrived to take the
injured in the dead of the Liberty the
American government now made sure that
no journalists could get anywhere near
the crew when they took the severely
wounded to various parts are they
actually posted guards on their rooms so
that no one could be interviewed by the
press the tol press blackout was in
effect back in Washington the government
insured there was little information for
the press while politics went on behind
closed doors I was told to go up
personally to the seventh floor well my
name is Bill Wooley I was in charge of
the arab-israel disc sit-in because the
Secretary of State himself Dean Rusk had
summoned ambassador harmon of Israel to
come in urgently and so I sent through
the meeting taking notes and in a loud
voice Secretary was was really demanding
some explanation for why and what had
happened the Ambassador himself seemed
to be ignorant of the incidents he
immediately said I can't believe what
you're telling me it's it would be
impossible it would be unheard of it was
especially tough for Lyndon Johnson to
date the most Pro Israeli American
president in history Johnson was in a
very tough mood I'm Tom Hughes I was
director in the State Department
director of intelligence and research at
the time of the Liberty incident and 67
attack on the Liberty Johnson himself
briefed
Newsweek magazine off-the-record that
the Israelis had attacked and the reason
they detect was that they thought this
was an intelligence ship that was
intercepting perhaps Israeli as well as
Egyptian communications but then
everything changed the fact that Johnson
himself was the leaker and briefer of
Newsweek was soon leaked and this
alarmed of course the Israeli embassy
and they're leading friends and the
Jewish organizations the Israeli embassy
regarded this as a major problem and
that what Johnson had told Newsweek
practically amounted to blood libel
declassified Israeli documents show they
were going to threaten President Johnson
with blood libel gross anti-semitism and
that would end his political career
blackmail visit Admiral Bobby our Emlyn
US Navy retired our former director of
the National Security Agency but they
know if he is thinking about running
again he's gonna need money for his
campaign
so alleging that he's blood labelling is
gonna arouse the Jewish donors the
Israeli government hired teams of
lawyers some of whom were close friends
of Lyndon Johnson and began an all-out
offensive they lent on the media to kill
critical stories and slanted others in
favor of Israel there was a campaign
mounted to see if what could be done
about returning Johnson to his normal
and predictable pro-israeli position at
the time Johnson was still undecided as
to whether to run for president
the following year efforts were to be
made to remind the president of the
delicacy of his own position that he
personally would might lose support for
his run for re-election in 1968 Israeli
tactics were clever they identified
Johnson's soft spot the war in Vietnam
and gave him two extraordinary gifts
neither of which were made public at the
time the first was political one of
Johnson's complaints about Israel was
that many of the Jewish
positions in the heads of the leaders in
the Jewish community were opposing him
on Vietnam and there was suddenly
becoming more silent on Vietnam as the
Liberty crisis moved so he also knew
that there was a move back in his favor
if he was moderate Israel there was a
second gift much more secret but vital
to the American president the dreadful
death toll in Vietnam was dominating the
domestic news agenda the North
Vietnamese had Russians surface-to-air
missiles which were bringing down
American aircraft on a daily basis the
American military attache in Israel got
a surprise visit from a senior Israeli
intelligence officer took some
helicopters and went across the North
Red Sea to the surface-to-air missile
sites and not only captures them but
took back everything the launchers the
missiles from the Manion maintenance
manuals the rest of it and then he went
to the u.s. embassy sierra de chelly and
said I think I have something you might
be interested in and because those were
the same missiles that our aircraft
flying over North Vietnam were
encountering day to day and
countermeasures was a huge issue so
grateful was the American government
they gave Israel two gifts in return
they we supplied them with the weapons
they had just lost in the war and the
Liberty inquiry run by the Department of
Defense the DoD was watered down all
that's influenced by what have we
benefited from from the captured sa-2
missile sites soon
Johnson did respond and it took a much
more lenient lion and wished that the
whole incident could be put behind us as
soon as possible
Johnson's softer approach to Israel was
immediately reflected in the American
Navy inquiry which was now underway
onboard the Liberty we began to realize
that a cover-up was was descending upon
us a lot of people had were in a key
position to offer testimony were not
given that opportunity I testified to
the machine-gunning of life rafts to the
captain state of mind and it was that
those two issues in particular were
totally omitted Lloyd painter was not
the only officer to have his testimony
ignored I saw what looked like unburned
Vaseline and I've scraped a little bit
of it off and put it in the jar and
sealed the cap on and I presented it to
the court of inquiry and that's the last
I saw of that jar there was no mention
of napalm and I'm sure that's what it
was they want to hear any of that I
didn't know that at the time I did don't
tell many months later that that I had
been recorded
looking back on it was a total sham the
US court of inquiry reported in just 20
days it was a rush job full of spelling
mistakes much key evidence ignored no
Israelis interviewed and it exonerated
them from blame I read the court of
inquiry and realized that my statements
had been stricken from the record and
never recorded so I knew then for
certain that the cover-up was massive
the Israelis then rushed out their own
report which concluded that the whole
affair was a series of mistakes and that
no one was to blame
the only dissenting voice was that of
the Israeli ambassador in Washington he
sent a secret telegram back home arguing
that Israel was clearly guilty he cited
the audio tape of the attack the
existence of which was known to top
Israeli officials and mentioned the
crucial 20-minute gap that followed the
Liberty's identification and the launch
of the torpedoes against her he said
they should own up to what they had done
and put the guilty on trial his advice
was ignored the focus now was to repair
the damage to American Israeli relations
the Israelis have always been very
skillful and tracking what the US
government is doing saying thinking and
effort to influence and they're by no
means the only country that doesn't many
do they're just more effective at it
than most and the great advantage they
have as compared to other countries
here's their influence on the Congress
around the time of the attack the
Washington Post had noted that the
Jewish lobby could help determine the
outcome of a hundred and sixty nine of
the 270 electoral votes needed to win
the White House the big aborted words
about the attack disappeared from press
releases at the Pentagon and a much more
bland and neutral sounding discourse
occurred and this was true of the
private briefings of official people in
the venogram made about the incident but
whatever was said to journalists every
US intelligence had believed the attack
was intentional one of them wrote a nice
whitewash for a group of ignorant stupid
and inept x-x-x
community has always been more generous
than many of their other counterparts in
supporting financially elections
political costs in the process that does
translate into influence many of
Johnson's closest friends and advisers
were pro-israeli and they reported back
to Tel Aviv on his every move the
Israeli story constantly shifted to
counter whatever new intelligence the
White House received so sensitive with
these communications that the Israelis
used code names to protect the identity
of the White House agents but for the
first time the members of the Ring can
be named Hamlet was a million-dollar
fundraiser for the Democrats when he
rang Johnson took his calls
he was a brine burg
minashi was Arthur Goldberg the US
ambassador to the United Nations
Harare was David Ginsburg a high-profile
Washington lawyer who also represented
the Israeli embassy Ilan was Supreme
Court justice Abe Fortas Lyndon Johnson
had dinner with him on the eve of the
six-day war the strategy worked the
us-israeli relationship proved to be
stronger than the killing and injuring
of more than 200 Americans the American
Israeli relationship was very much at
stake and was brought back from the
precipice the crucial intelligence came
from the US ambassador to the United
Nations Arthur Goldberg
he warned Tel Aviv that the United
States had the audio tape which revealed
Israeli pilots knew it was an American
ship before they attacked the tape was
quietly buried I think a conscious
decision was made to sweep it under the
rug to put it behind my reading is that
the US government had made a decision to
accept the apology and reject the
another rationale but don't push it
further with the politics sorted the
only remaining issue was the fate of the
USS Liberty badly damaged and now in
Malta for extensive repairs the torpedo
hole was massive and was revealed to be
much bigger once they got the ship into
drydock and drained it at water the
sealed compartment was a water-filled
too full of bodies body parts and
top-secret equipment
[Music]
you can smell death and you could smell
oil that's what I remember as soon as
the air hit the bodies they began to
deteriorate rapidly you do what you have
to do they were your shipmates still are
the Navy was more concerned with Whitman
parts than they were body parts but when
I went down I knew that you couldn't
separate the two we had to start
shoveling up the the parts 168 bags
worth elsewhere the makeup artists were
getting to work we were in the drydock
about six weeks and three hundred
Maltese workers are working two shifts a
day and I think seven days a week to try
it they were cutting out the shell holes
welding plates over that and fabricating
metal to cover the torpedo hole and then
in one day they painted the entire ship
we looked like nothing ever happened
we took it across the Atlantic it was
like being in a cemetery but when we
pulled into port we look good this press
and everything with air and we look like
basically nothing really happened so it
was great for the press to downplay what
worry happened to us while the survivors
met the widows and friends the 168 bags
of body parts and top-secret equipment
were quietly taken to an incinerator and
burnt a year later and the Liberty
Captain William McGonagall was given the
Medal of Honor America's highest award
for gallantry the tradition has always
been that it is presented by the
president in the White House I look at
these two gallon reams and I see Oh
Captain McGonagall never heard words
like these from his commander in chief
there was no television coverage for him
as he received his medal in a quiet
ceremony in the Navy Yard President
Johnson was just four miles away at the
time he stayed in the White House to
hand out diplomas to
schoolchildren the reason was revealed
in this internal memo which advised
President Johnson that due to the nature
and sensitivity of these awards they
should be given by the Department of
Defense not by him the advice was clear
no press release regarding them should
be made when I received my Purple Heart
in a secret ceremony in the captains
office
I was admonished threat of court-martial
don't ever tell anyone where you got
this don't ever tell anyone how you got
this medal the following year
American aid to Israel increased
fourfold and President Johnson agreed a
treaty classified above top secret with
Israel for the mutual exchange of
intelligence an arrangement which is
still in place today codenamed stone
Ruby
[Music]
one of the things that bothers me is
there wasn't a nice explanation of what
went on no one wants to talk about the
why the big secret the Israelis wanted
to protect was their next move they had
told the Americans that this was to be a
limited war and not a land grab but on
June 8th 1967 their forces were poised
to attack and seize the Golan Heights
and invade Syria something they wish to
keep from the White House until they'd
done it successive American
administrations both Republican and
Democrat have refused to deal with the
Liberty even the issue of war crimes
against unarmed Americans has never been
addressed there was a war crimes report
filed by the Liberty Veterans
Association to address the issues of
such war crimes as firing on life rafts
that was never answered properly I don't
think was answered period the people who
are responsible for attacking the
Liberty Liberty were you know by and
large the military individuals in the
war room I don't know how many four
eight ten those are the people who came
up with the plan
those are the individuals who are
responsible for the attack the pilots
the motor torpedo boat personnel they
were ordered you know you don't follow
orders go to go to jail so they have to
follow through it wasn't the Israeli
people who ordered that attack it wasn't
the average Jewish person who ordered
that attack we really need to exonerate
the average Jewish person Israeli from
this and go towards those individuals
who are responsible for the attack no
one was really willing to take this on
not to start the State Department the
White House not the Congress it's in
everybody's best interest to just let
this go and that's exactly what they did
but by doing that they left a lot of
pain for the survivor
and for the families because there was a
lot of broken families broken marriages
alcoholism depression post-traumatic
stress disorder so those those crew
members suffered a lot but so did the
families the hardest part was the the
reaction of our own government toward us
and we were actually the fingers were
pointed to us and the Israelis were they
weren't they and they were never
questioned as to why they did it they
only questioned us the families still
want answers from their government which
remains silent for many some memories
never fade we had a wonderful time just
being together I met Alan at a party we
spent a lot of time talking throughout
the evening and at the end of the
evening he said to me are you busy
tomorrow afternoon and I said well no
and he said do you think we could get
married then I was told that he was
among the dead it was absolutely the
worst moment of my life
there's not a day that doesn't go by
where I don't think about those guys I
mean I went through hell but they left
the earth
[Music]
when I'm walking up to the mass grave I
still feel a connection with those
people hard to explain but it's still
there's hope I want to remember that
connection as long as I can what we
shared what we felt
[Music]
it took 13 years of haggling before both
sides finally agreed a compensation deal
for the ship by 1980 the bill plus
interest was just over 17 million
dollars Israel offered six the Americans
accepted then sold the Liberty for
$100,000 scrap the settlement for the
victim was quicker but many are still
unhappy with it today
[Music]
not filled it was a fair settlement I
would have bought it but I was so sad
and broken I just didn't have the energy
to take on that fight and it wasn't a
fight that I thought I could win the
State Department we're very eager for
the survivors to make that settlement
they sent a check for the the amount and
that that was that the American
government came up with a formula for
the Israelis to compensate the widows
and children for their loss this
included a payment for shock and mental
anguish the widows got $25,000 with
$10,000 for each of their children over
five an American government lawyer
doubted that children under five could
sufficiently comprehend the event to
suffer shock and grief the u.s. proposed
they should therefore receive nothing an
offer the Israelis accepted
since the attack on the Liberty the USA
and Israel have grown ever closer at the
time George ball the u.s. Under
Secretary of State noted that it seemed
clear to the Israelis that as American
leaders did not have the courage to
punish them for the blatant murder of
American citizens they would let them
get away with anything
[Music]
you